So, let us continue with our discussion of
sorting, and look at another simple sorting
algorithm.
So, as we said before that are many more motivations
for sorting; starting from searching, to removing
duplicates, to computing some statistical
properties, such as frequency tables, and
so on.
And the example that we have in hand, is one
way we are asked to sort a bunch of exam papers
in descending order of marks.
So, second strategy to sort this bunch of
exam papers would be the following. So, you
take the top most paper in this stack that
you have, and create a new stack with that.
Now you take the second paper and compare
it to the first paper. If the mark is bigger,
you put it above, because you want it in descending
order. If the mark is smaller, you put it
below. So, after this step, you have two stacks
of papers in descending order. Now a stack
of two papers rather. And now you take the
third paper, and now you see where it fits
with respect to the first two; either it goes
all the way to the bottom or it goes between
the two or it goes all the way on top. In
this way at each point you pick up the top
most paper in the unsorted stack, and you
inserted it into its correct position, in
the sorted stack that you are building up.
So, let see how would work. So, supposing
we have our old array of unsorted elements.
So, what we do is, we start with the very
first element namely 74. So, we take 74, and
we start a new stack. Now we have to take.
Now the top most elements at this point is
now 32, to the left most in this case. So,
now we have to take 32, and since it is smaller
it should go to the left of 74. So, we do
this, so we now get this array. Now we look
at the next element; namely 89. And once again
it must go at the appropriate position with
respect these two, so it must go to the right
of the 74, so we get this array. Now we take
55, and we have to find out where it goes.
So we can start at end and say it is not here,
it must go to the left of this.
Then we finally, find that this is the correct
place for it to go. So, this is the insertion
step. We take each element, and we walk down
to the point where we want to insert. So,
55 comes between 32 and 74. Now where does
21 go. Well if we try to insert it, it turns
out, it must go all the way to beginning,
because it is smaller than everything that
we have so far. So, this is the next step.
And finally, when we do 64, it will come between
55 and 74. So, at each step we pick up the
next element, and we insert it into the already
sorted segment that we have created with all
the previous elements.
So, we start by building a sorted sequence
with one element. So, this is called insertion
sort. And we insert each unsorted element
into the correct place in the already sorted
sequence. So, it is because of this insertion
step, that every element is inserted into
its correct place. This is called insertion
sort.
So, this is a very straight forward iterative
implementation again. So, what do is, we have
an initial array A, from position 0 to n minus
1. So, what do; of course, is at the beginning
we have to do nothing. So, we cannot assume
that we actually start with position 1. So,
we start with position 1, and then we look
backwards. So, we start with the current position,
and we work backwards, and so long as the
value that we are looking at, is smaller than
the value to its left. We keep moving. So,
we have assumed that we have this swap operation,
which basically takes two positions in an
array and exchanges them. So, swap A nextpos
nextpos minus 1, means take the value at A
nextpos, take the value at A nextpos minus
1, and swap them. As we explained at the beginning,
we can assume that such things are basic operations,
it is convenient for us to express algorithm
like it, as adding this only adds a constant
factor to the number of overall operations
that we have to do, which we can ignore in
asymptotic complexity.
So, we swap each element with the element
on its left, so long as it is, the element
on the left smaller, and we stop when we come
to a position where the value on the left,
is greater than or equal to the current value,
at this point we stop. So, this brings the
value that we started with, is in correct
position. So, in general, if we had; say done
up to some i and then I start walking backward.
Then so long as i is smaller than i minus
1, I will exchange. I will keep exchanging,
until I reach a position, where a find that
the values on the left, are smaller than this
value, and I will stop. So, this is a basic
loop, and I do this for all elements. So,
for each element I have to insert it. So,
first time I have to insert it in a smaller
segment. As I go along, the segment we have
to insert it in, becomes longer and longer.
So, we can see now how this works, on an array
given to us. So, we first of all start with,
looking at this segment. So, this is my initial
configuration. So, this is sorted, and this
is unsorted. So, now, I will immediately see
that 32, is bigger than 74, so I will exchange,
and then because it reaches the beginning.
So, one of the condition in that loop, is
that if I reach beginning of the loop, so
if nextpos is equal to 0, I will also stop,
if I found it to the left most position then
the loops terminates . So, having done that,
then I have this. So, now I must try to insert
89 into this. So, I will find that 89 is already
bigger than 74, nothing needs to be done.
So, the first nontrivial step that happens,
is with 55. So, when I do 55, I compare it
with the 89. I find that 89 is bigger than
55, I will exchange them. Now I will compare
55 with the element on its left 74.
And then again it is in the wrong way, so
I will exchange. Finally, having found that
55 is now bigger than 32, I will stop. So,
this is now the end of this phase. Now I will
look at the next element to do, which is 21.
So, I will look at 21. So, 21 will get exchanged
with 89. Then 21 will exchange, so it will
get exchanged all the way to the left, so
I will exchange 21 with 74. Then I will exchange
21 with 55. Then I will exchange 21 with 32.
And now once again I will stop, because I
have reached the left most position, there
is nothing to the left. And the last round
I will take 64. So, now, this part is all
sorted. So, I will take 64 and try to insert
it here, so it will swap with 89. It will
swap with 74, and then stop. This is how insertion
sort works. This is a very intuitive sort.
If you take a pack of card and try to sort
it, typically this is how you would sort.
So, if you look at the analysis, it is quite
similar to selection sort that we saw before.
So, inserting a value means we have to walk
down that segment till the very end. Now of
course, one might argue, that to find the
position to insert, you can use binary search.
We need not go one element at a time. If you
want to actually find the position where it
must go, we can use binary search, but even
if you find the position where it must go
in logarithmic time. You need to shift all
the elements, and that is what really takes
linear time. You need to actually make space
for this. So in the worst case, you might
have to put it in the left most position.
So, all the k elements which are already there
must be shifted right by 1, and that takes
k steps. So, binary search, although it can
help as find the position faster, does not
really help us to implement insert any faster.
So, insert takes linear time for a segment,
and these segments keep growing. Initially
I want to insert A 1 into segment of size
1, then A 2 into segment of size 2 and so
on. So, I have 1 plus 2 plus 3 up to n minus
1; finally, A n minus 1 must be inserted in
the segment A 0 to A n minus 2, which is of
length n minus 1. So, again I have t of n
is 1 plus 2 up to n minus 1, and this is just
a variation of this summation we have seen
many times before, it is n into n minus 1
by 2. So, this is again an order n square
sort.
So, once again as we saw for selection sort.
There is a natural way to think of insertion
sort as a recursive thing. We sort part of
the array, and then we insert an element into
that to grow it. So, in this case we think
of the array as being in 2 components. So,
we have a sorted portion, and an unsorted
portion. So, what we do is, we take the first
element here and insert it and then we recursively
apply the algorithm to the rest of the unsorted
portion. So, if A 0 to i minus 1. So, if this
is position i and this is position i minus
1. So, i minus 1 is the last sorted position,
i is the first unsorted position. Then we
insert A i into the sorted portion. And then
we recursively sorted A i plus 1 onwards.
And once again when i is actually here, at
n minus 1, then we do not have to do anything,
so we can just trivially return.
So, now we have a recursive formulation in
two parts. So, we have insertion sort itself,
which says sort this unsorted segment from
start to n minus 1. So, if start is already
at n minus 1 return; otherwise insert the
value at position start into the rest of A,
which we will see below. And then recursively
sort the rest of the array from start plus
1 onwards. So, what does the insert do? Well
it starts at the position start and tries
to insert it into the segment 0 to start minus
1. So, it works backwards exactly as we had
done in the iterative thing. It finds the
first position such that the value on the
left, is at least as small as the value currently
looking for and stops there. So, this insert
is basically what was in the body of the iterate
loop, but instead of doing an outer loop,
we do it recursively. So, how much time does
this take.
Once again this is just give you practice
in looking at recursively algorithms and writing
down the analysis. So, whenever we have a
recursively algorithm we write a recurrence;
that is, we write of formulation of t of n
in terms of smaller values of t. So, let us
try to analyze this recursively algorithm.
So, we will analyze it, looking at a slightly
differently from the way we have formulated
the algorithm. So, if you want to sort A 0
to A n minus 1, then what we are doing is,
we are recursively sorting this segment, and
then inserting this value. So, it takes time
t n to sort the entire thing. This breaks
up into taking time t n minus 1 to sort the
first part up to n minus 2, and then n minus
1 step to do the insert right. So, we get
same recurrence as we did for selection sort
t of n is t of n this is the insert space,
and plus t of n minus 1 which is the recursive
phase.
And if we expand this out exactly as we did
before, we get n minus 1 plus n minus 2 down
to n, which is n into n minus 1 by 2, which
is order n square. So, again there is no different
between time for the recursive and iterative
versions; except that one should keep in mind
in general that, recursive calls are more
expansive then iterative loops. We will come
back to this point a little later, but otherwise
if we count recursive calls calling a function
as a basic operation, then there is no difference
between the recursive and the iterative version.
The recursive version is sometimes easier
to conceptually understand and to code.
So, what we have seen is that, the two natural
algorithms that we would typically apply when
we do something manually; selection sort and
insertion sort are both order n square. There
is another algorithm which you may come across
which we will not discuss in this course called
bubble sort, which is not something that we
would do naturally, but it seems to be a favorite
way of describing how to do the things on
a computer. So, bubble sort basically does
this insertion kind of swapping, except it
takes the maximum or minimum value depending
on which you want to do. Say it takes the
maximum value and moves it to one end of the
array. So, then you have like selection sort,
the largest value at one end. Then you go
back to the beginning, and again you keep
looking at adjacent values, and take the second
largest value to the second last position
and so on. So, bubble sort is also n Square,
but as we have seen n square algorithms are
not really feasible for large values of n.
So, if we have n above about 10000, somewhere
between 10 to the 4 and 10 to the 5, then
n square is going to take several hundred
seconds to execute, and therefore, this is
not going to be useful for large bodies of
data.
But this is not to say that these algorithms
are all equally bad. In particular it turns
out that if you actually look at experimental
evidence, then insertion sort usually behaves
better than selection sort, and both of them
are better than bubble sort. And to think
about why insertion sort behaves well, just
imagine what happens when we apply insertion
sort to an already sorted list. Whenever we
want to insert something into the already
sorted list, we will find that it is already
in the correct position. So, the bottle neck,
which is the insert phase, is the bottle neck.
The insert face will basically terminate after
one comparison. So, insertion sort will essentially
become linear time, if we apply it to an already
sorted list. So, this is why in many situation;
insertion sort actually behaves a little better
than other order n square sorts, but in general
order n square sorting algorithms are not
acceptable, and we would like to look at more
clever ways of sorting our data, because in
order to sort large volumes of data this is
impractical.